Gambia Community Health Worker Hypertension Training Manual
Source: Gambian MoH CHW Orientation Program on Hypertension Screening, Referral and Follow-up
Training Duration: 2 Days

Overall/general objective To equip the participants with knowledge and skills to prevent, screen, refer and follow-up clients with hypertension in the community. Specific Objectives By the end of this orientation the participants will be able to: Explain the meaning of hypertension Identify the risk factors of hypertension

Measure and interpret blood pressure readings Educate the community on prevention and management of hypertension Facilitate management of hypertension through referral and follow-up Training Duration 2 Days

The top number, which is also the higher of the two numbers, is called systolic and it measures the pressure in the arteries when the heart beats (when the heart muscle contracts). The bottom number, which is also the lower of the two numbers, is called diastolic and it measures the pressure in the arteries between heartbeats (when the heart muscle is resting between beats and refilling with blood)

Normal blood pressure The blood pressure is normal when the top number (systolic) is lower than 140 and the lower number (diastolic) is lower than 90 Low blood pressure The blood pressure is considered low when the top number (systolic) is lower than 90 and the lower number (diastolic) is lower than 60, with symptoms of low blood pressure such as dizziness or fainting. Other causes of low blood pressure include medicines, bleeding, aging and conditions such as dehydration.

Understanding Blood Pressure Blood pressure is typically recorded in mm Hg as two numbers, written as a ratio.

High blood pressure The blood pressure is high when the top number (systolic) is 140 or higher and the lower number (diastolic) is 90 or higher. Note: Our blood pressure changes depending on the activities we are doing. If we are running the blood pressure will be high, if we are resting the blood pressure will be lower Define hypertension Hypertension is diagnosed when blood pressure is equal to or greater than 140/90 mmHg on three separate occasions

Why is it important to understand hypertension? In reference to the water pump (heart) illustration given earlier; when the pressure is too high the water pipes (blood vessels) could burst, the pump might break or the tap could come off (the impact on other organs e.g. eyes, kidneys, brain). The risk of this happening increases if the person is smoking, according to age, or is overweight.

Is hypertension a problem in The Gambia? The prevalence of hypertension in 29% (cham et al) Studies in older populations report prevalence rates of >20% Participants to discuss trends observed in their facilities Brainstorm on possible reasons why these trends exist

Identify the risks of hypertension. What is a risk factor? A risk factor is a condition or behavior that increases a person's chance of developing a disease. Risk factors for hypertension include health conditions, lifestyle and family history There are risk factors that we can do something about and others that we can not do anything about

Non modifiable (not changeable) risk factors for hypertension: Advancing age, Family history of hypertension, Chronic conditions e.g. diabetes mellitus, kidney diseases, heart disease, Pregnancy, Race.

Modifiable (changeable) risk factors for hypertension: Being overweight, Physical inactivity, Use of tobacco, Stress, Drinking excess alcohol, Unhealthy diet, Excessive salt intake. Being overweight The more you weigh, the harder the heart needs to pump blood to the whole body, hence the higher the pressure on the walls of the blood vessels.

Overweight can be estimated by measuring the waist circumference or the weight to height ratio, referred to as the Body Mass Index (BMI).

Advancing age The older you get, the stiffer the blood vessels become, hence the higher the risk of hypertension

Unhealthy diet Being overweight or obese, can contribute to more fat in the body including the blood vessels A diet low in fruits, vegetables and fiber and high in fats, salt and refined carbohydrates will increase the risk of hypertension, heart disease and stroke Physical activity Physical activity refers to any bodily movement which uses energy and is performed as part of daily activities Physical activity exercises the heart and the blood vessels to work well Physical activities help to reduce weight and blood sugar levels

Family history of hypertension The risk of hypertension is higher among people with family members with hypertension Use of tobacco Tobacco use (e.g. cigarette smoking, shisha etc.) makes blood vessels stiff and narrow, therefore restricting free flow of blood The chemicals in tobacco raise blood pressure and damage the blood vessels.

Stress Stress temporarily raises the blood pressure Stress can lead to other behaviours that contribute to developing hypertension e.g. smoking, alcohol use Drinking alcohol Alcohol intake weakens the heart, it increases weight and cholesterol Excessive salt intake Taking more salt increases water retention in the body, which causes high blood pressure. Reducing salt intake is beneficial for blood pressure prevention and control. Chronic conditions e.g. diabetes, kidney disease These conditions can lead to increased blood pressure Pregnancy Changes that occur during pregnancy can lead to hypertension. Therefore it is important to go for ANC (Antenatal Care)

How to measure and interpret blood pressure readings Tools for measuring blood pressure We measure blood pressure with an instrument called sphygmomanometer: a blood pressure machine. There are two kinds of monitors for measuring blood pressure Manual (mercury and aneroid) Automatic (digital)

How to measure blood pressure Let the client rest for 3 - 5 minutes The client should not have taken any drink with caffeine e.g. coffee, tea or cool/energy drink or smoked in the previous 30 minutes Sit the client in a relaxed, upright position; with the legs and arms outstretched Select the appropriate size of cuff

The arm should be supported at the level of the heart. Wrap the cuff around the client's left arm to measure the blood pressure (In cases where the left arm can not be used, use the right arm)

When you tighten the cuff on the arm you should be able to insert two fingers under the cuff Press the start button on the automatic BP machine and observe the readings when the machine beeps Note the first reading and repeat the procedure after two minutes Record the second reading of the two taken

Common errors in Blood Pressure measurement Using the inappropriate cuff size on the client. Placing the cuff on the wrong place on the arm. Holding on to the cuff while taking the BP measurement. Taking BP on tight clothes, hence causing pressure on the arm.

Educating the community on prevention and management of hypertension How to Lower Blood Pressure Hypertension increases the chances of developing heart disease or heart attack, stroke, heart failure, or kidney failure. The good news is that hypertension can be prevented and controlled. Many things can be done in our daily lives to reduce the chances of having hypertension and developing complications. This is called lifestyle change or modification

It is important for people to know their blood pressure Treating Hypertension saves lives. It can reduce chances of heart attack, stroke, and heart failure. Methods of preventing hypertension Overweight and obesity result from abnormal or excessive fat accumulation that may cause health problems.

BMI Classification Source: WHO Classification of BMI Overweight - BMI >= 25kg/m2 Obesity - BMI >= 30kg/m2 Computation of BMI Weight in kg divided by the square of height in square meters

Waist-hip ratio This is a way of measuring where body fat is stored. A high waist-to-hip ratio indicates an increased risk of obesity-related health problems. Waist-to-hip ratio is calculated by dividing the measured waist circumference by the measured hip circumference. Indicators of risk Women: WHR Greater than 0.85 Men: WHR Greater than 1.0

Physical Activity and Hypertension Examples of simple physical activities one can engage in: Playing with the children Walking instead of using a motorbike or vehicle Working in the garden Household chores e.g. cleaning the house, washing clothes Take the stairs instead of the elevator/lift. Taking a brisk walk (walk at a fast pace) Swimming Dancing Jogging

Lifestyle Modification Take the following steps to prevent high blood pressure or to control or lower your blood pressure if it is too high. Cook and eat with less salt (Do not add salt on the table) Engage in physical activity for at least 30minutes for most days of the week and ensure you sweat Aim for a healthy weight (achieve the right weight for your height) Eat more vegetables and fruits Stop the use of tobacco/tobacco products and reduce or stop alcohol Ensure you have less stress in your life or find ways to manage the stress If you are at high risk of developing hypertension, make sure you get regular medical check-up

Facilitating the management of hypertension Identify and manage people with hypertension It is the role of the participant to screen Household members for high blood pressure, refer and support in the management of hypertension. Participants will be expected to conduct assessment and screening of people for high blood pressure during household visits and other community interactions

In order to identify people with high blood pressure and help people with hypertension, the following steps should be followed: Introduce your intentions to the client Measure the blood pressure of the client. Show him/her the risk factors on the job aid and ask him or her to tell you if he/she is at high or low risk.

Inform the client your findings. Record the results If the BP is in the normal range, counsel on prevention measures

Client paths and their interaction with CHWs In order for the client to have a confirmed diagnosis of Hypertension they require multiple elevated blood pressure readings over a period of time - typically 2-3 months. Therefore it is essential that as a CHW you assist with this process and ensure the client receives the correct number of readings and is correctly linked to the health facility

As a CHW, all clients you encounter that have an elevated BP reading (top or bottom reading is equal or higher than systolic 140 or diastolic 90 mmHg) are likely to follow three possible paths:

Client Path 1: These are the clients who have an elevated BP reading on visit 1, and you refer to a health facility, and are able to attend the appointment

Client Path 2: These are those clients whom you find have an elevated BP reading on visit 1, but due to various reasons, the clients are unable to attend the clinic day as advised by you, and whom you schedule to come back and do a second reading on a different day within a month.

Client Path 3: These are those clients whom you found to have an elevated BP reading on visit 1, you referred them to the facility for a facility level BP recording and further evaluation, and have now been sent back to you for a 3rd reading at the community. For these types of clients, you are required to do the third BP reading and then refer them back to the facility

Since these clients will have already been issued with an Appointment Card (at the NCD Clinics) at the facility, all BP reading should be recorded in the clients booklet. For all clients, on any visit, if either the top or the bottom numbers is higher than systolic 180 or diastolic 110 mmHg, refer the client to the health facility immediately.

It is important that each reading is captured in the clients patient booklet as well as the screening register. You must follow up with clients on a regular basis to ensure they have a blood pressure reading at least once a month (by you or the health facility) and ensure you continue to follow up with the client once diagnosed to ensure they are following lifestyle changes and taking medicine as required.

Referral When taking blood pressure always consider the second BP measurement. If blood pressure reading is equal or higher than systolic 140 and/or diastolic 90 mmHg, refer the client to the health facility All clients with BP readings of SBP >180 and/or DBP reading of >110 on any visit should be referred to a facility immediately Follow-up and Defaulter tracing Visit the client to confirm that they went to the health facility Also, follow-up to ensure clients are adhering to the healthcare worker's recommendations Remind clients with hypertension to be checked their blood pressure regularly Remind the clients and/or care giver to visit the health facility as advised by the health provider

Educate family members on hypertension and the importance of adhering to treatment.

Adherence Treatment adherence means taking medication exactly as prescribed, and not missing any doses. Important information about medication Know the name of the hypertension medicine and keep the package Do not miss clinic appointment Carry medication and appointment card while travelling As a participant, always inquire why the client is not adhering to treatment and give feedback to the healthcare worker.

Talk to your health care provider about any issues that may make adherence difficult: Question: How do other medications I am taking interact with my hypertension treatment? Answer: This will be best answered by the health worker on your next visit to the health facility because every medicine reacts differently

Question: I missed a dose of my medication, what can I do? Answer: If you forgot to take a dose, take immediately you remember if it is a once per day dose, if its more doses per day the await the next dose. Question: Can I share medicine with another client? Answer: No, this is not allowed

Question: What will I do if I feel sick after taking the medicine? Answer: This will be best answered by the health worker at the health facility because every medicine reacts differently Question: I have been taking the medicines for so long, can I try herbal medicine which can cure me? Answer: Herbal medicines do not cure hypertension, it is important to adhere/comply with your schedule to make the medicine effective A defaulter is a client who is either not adhering to the prescribed management; or is not adhering to the health facility's appointments

It is the role of the CHWs to keep record of clients in his/her assigned households and advise them to adhere the prescribed management. The CHW is the link between the community and the health facility. The health facility should share the list of the defaulters with the CHW.

Orientation to data collection tools Orientate CHWs on data collection tools Submit monthly reports to the sub-district leader Add number of hypertensives on the white Board
