Hypertension Patient Support SMS/Text Message Library
Source: WHO HEARTS Hypertension Program — Patient Engagement Messages
Purpose: Supportive text messages for patients enrolled in hypertension management programs

MEDICATION ADHERENCE MESSAGES:

Welcome to the hypertension program! You will start to receive supportive text messages about healthy living to control your blood pressure

If your blood pressure is high, you have likely been prescribed medication. Taking it will help control your blood pressure and keep your heart healthy

Controlling your blood pressure can prevent heart attack or stroke. Check your blood pressure regularly and make any needed lifestyle changes

Your blood pressure medication is for the long term. Keep taking it even if you feel well

Your doctor should have explained how to take your medication at home. If unsure, ask the pharmacist to clarify when you fill your prescription

Some medications are for quick relief, such as for headaches. Your blood pressure medication is for long-term control, which means taking it daily

It is important to take your medication as prescribed. This means taking it at the right times and not missing any doses

Keep on top of regular blood pressure screening. Your blood pressure should be less than 140/90. If it high, see your doctor

Often you can measure your blood pressure by yourself at local pharmacies. If you cannot measure it at home, try the pharmacy

Label and package your tablets in a 7-day pill box to help you remember to take them. Fill once per week with the correct tablets for each day of the week

Doctors visits are important. Bring a support person with you to write down what the doctor says so you can read or talk about it later

A calendar can help you keep track of doctors appointments and when to check your blood pressure. Try it on your mobile phone!

Try to take your tablets the same way each day, such as after you brush your teeth in the morning. Be consistent and it will soon become a habit

If you often forget to take your medication before you leave in the morning, keep an extra dose in a secure place at work or in your car

Set reminders to refill your prescription as soon as you bring them home. Write it on the calendar or set a reminder on your phone

Talk to your doctor if you are feeling unwell as some people experience side effects from medications. Your doctor can help find a solution

HEALTHY DIET MESSAGES:

You can control your blood pressure by using less salt in your food. Protect your heart

To stay healthy, you ideally need to eat at least 5 portions of fruit or vegetables a day. Try a rainbow of colours each day

Prepare food using only a little bit of salt to help you and your family maintain normal blood pressure. Keep the salt shaker off the table!

An adult only needs half a teaspoon of salt per day (less than 5g, or 2g of sodium). Look for salt and/or sodium on nutrition facts food labels

Another way to protect your heart is to eat less fat. Try to remove the skin from chicken or fat from meat before cooking or eating

Planning ahead can be key to eating a healthy diet. If you chop up vegetables for dinner, keep some for a mid-day snack the next day

Treat foods like hamburgers, pizza, chips and pastries contain a lot of salt. Limit treats to control blood pressure

Seasonal fruit are cheaper and taste better. Make the most of this when you are at the market. If you can, freeze extras for later

Cook your food in the oven instead of frying for a healthy heart. If you do fry, use vegetable oils instead of butter

Bit by bit reduce the salt in the food you cook. That way you and your family will slowly adjust to the taste. Add herbs for flavour!

Try making your lunch instead of buying ready-made food. Healthy low salt sandwich options include veggies, chicken or beans instead of ham or cold cuts

By eating less salt and unhealthy fat now, you are saving yourself a lot of medical expenses for the future. That feels good!

Fill up on fruit and vegetables. They contain no fat or salt, meaning they can help control blood pressure and help you lose weight

Vegetables like tomatoes, broccoli, spinach, Swiss chard and pumpkin help you control blood pressure. Aim for at least 3 servings of veggies per day

Plan your meals in advance. Planning will help make sure you have healthy food to eat when you need it

Eating less sugar is good for your heart. Try to reduce the amount of sugar you add to coffee and tea, and drink water instead of juice or soda

Try to use vegetable oils instead of butter or margarine. They contain good fats.

Stock cubes and ready-made soups contain a lot of salt. Try to avoid them.

PHYSICAL ACTIVITY MESSAGES:

Regular physical activity, like a brisk walk each day, will help control your blood pressure and protect you against heart attack and stroke

Regular exercise like walking, gardening, dancing, or playing a sport helps keep your mind and body strong. Make it a daily habit for good health!

Just starting out? See how many minutes you can walk without stopping. Then increase by 1-2 minutes each time

Moderate physical activity, like a brisk walk, should make you breathe slightly faster and make your heart beat slightly faster

Set a physical activity goal each week. Write down when, for how long, and what type of exercise you want to do. This will help you check your progress

Remember your exercise. Aim for 150 minutes per week, which can be done by walking 20-30 minutes each day

Plan to do activity which you enjoy and you will have fun while you control your blood pressure. Ask your friends or family for ideas!

Walk to work, walk to the shops, take the stairs, play with the kids or take the dog for a walk. It all adds up build physical activity into your day

Problems have solutions! For example, it can be hard to exercise in bad weather. Try an indoor activity instead

Find an exercise friend to help you stay on track. Remind each other to go for your walks or do them together. Good for your body and mind

Physical activity can be tough at the start, but it can help you feel much more energetic. Aim for a few minutes, you may keep going once you start!

If you are tired or busy, try to do 10 minutes of exercise at 2-3 different times during the day

Exercise at the right level. You should feel a bit tired and slightly out of breath but can still talk

People of any age can do physical activity. It is never too late to start. You can do it!

Physical activity is good for the body and soul! Being active can help you control your blood pressure and body weight, and help you relax

Think about what makes you skip your exercise. Work out a plan to deal with them, look at your list when you need extra motivation

Mix it up to stay motivated. Try walking a different route or a new activity or exercise class to keep things fresh

Change your habits for healthy living! Try swapping time that you normally spend sitting down, like watching TV, with physical activity

TOBACCO CESSATION MESSAGES:

Stopping tobacco use can reduce your risk of heart attack, stroke, cancer and other diseases. There is no safe amount of tobacco

Quitting tobacco is the most important thing you can do for your health and reduce your risk of heart disease

The healthiest bet is to avoid tobacco. Do not start smoking or use other types. Get all the support you can to help you quit.

Ask your health care worker to help you quit smoking. They may have suggestions you have not thought of or tried before

Try setting small, specific goals. Set your QUIT DAY and a then a goal to help, like distracting yourself with chewing gum when you feel the urge to smoke

Protect your family's health by not allowing smoking in your home or car. Second-hand smoke can harm those around you

Think about WHEN you use tobacco. You will have triggers, like drinking coffee or feeling stressed. Your list of triggers is a 1st step to quitting

Take it 1 day at a time and practice avoiding your triggers. Quitting tobacco is hard but many people have done it!

Counselling and medications can help you quit tobacco. Talk to your doctor or health care worker

There is NO such thing as safe tobacco. Cigars, pipes, hookah, and dip carry many of the same health risks as cigarettes

Do not be fooled! There is no such thing as a safe cigarette. Quitting is the only way to protect yourself from the health risks of smoking

Think of supportive people you trust, like friends, family, or your partner. Call or text them when you feel the urge to smoke

You may feel strange when you quit- this is withdrawal. You are addicted to nicotine and your body is used to smoking. These feelings will go away

Whether smoked, chewed, or sniffed, tobacco contains nicotine. Nicotine is highly addictive. Gum and candy help with cravings. Stock up!

People, places, and things can make you want to smoke. Write down your triggers. Make a plan to help you steer clear of them

Take all the tobacco-related materials out of your home, car, office, or wherever you keep them. Lighters, matches, and ashtrays. Everything.

Even the strongest tobacco cravings will go away after a few minutes. Focus on something else and remind yourself why you are tobacco free

Think about what you are gaining and why you want to quit smoking. Stay focused. It will get easier

ALCOHOL REDUCTION MESSAGES:

Limiting alcohol intake can reduce your risk of heart attack, stroke, cancer and other diseases. Aim for less than 2 drinks per day

Avoid alcohol to control your blood pressure and reduce risk of heart disease. Remember that less is best!

The healthiest bet is to avoid alcohol. Aim for less than 2 drinks per day with no alcohol on at least 2 days per week

Despite what you may hear in the media, alcohol should not be taken for health reasons. Limit your use to less than 2 drinks per day

The key to goal setting is to set small, specific goals. For example, set a goal to avoid alcohol completely on Tuesdays and Thursdays

Ask your health care worker to help you quit or cut back on alcohol. They may have suggestions you have not thought of or tried before

Some medical conditions can be made worse by drinking alcohol. Listen to your doctor's advice and limit how much you drink

Remember to avoid alcohol completely if you are driving, operating machinery, or pregnant/breast feeding. The safest amount is zero!

If you find it hard to limit yourself to 2 alcoholic drinks per day, think about why. Coming up with your list of triggers is a good 1st step

Take it 1 day at a time and practice avoiding your triggers to drink. Quitting or cutting back on alcohol can hard but many people have done it!

Think of supportive people you trust, like friends, family, or your partner. Ask them to help you cut back on alcohol

Going alcohol free may be best for your health. Think about what you are gaining on those tough days

You may be on medication for your blood pressure or other health concerns. It is not safe to drink alcohol while taking some medications. Ask your doctor

It may be easier to give it up alcohol all together if you find it is hard to just cut back. Less temptation to indulge

If you have cut back on your drinking, think about how you feel. Your health is improving and you may notice benefits

Distracting yourself when you feel like drinking alcohol can help. Try doing something you have been putting off, plan a vacation, or call a friend

Think about how to limit alcohol when you go to a party, game, or bar. Try low alcohol beverages, or stick to soda water with lemon

Try a quick walk if you feel the urge to drink. Your health will be rewarded two times over! Physical activity can make you feel good too

Look back at the goals you set at the start of the programme and reward yourself for goals achieved. Do something you enjoy, you have earned it!

Well done! You have finished the programme. If you stay focused, you should gain further benefits

SELF-ASSESSMENT CHECK-IN QUESTIONS:

Have you measured your blood pressure in the last month?
Was your last blood pressure reading less than 140/90 mmHg?
Did you take your medications yesterday?
Did you take your medications each day last week?
Have you eaten 5 servings of fruit and vegetables today?
Have you started to use less salt in cooking and eating?
Have you reduced the amount of fat you cook with and eat?
Did you do 30 minutes of physical activity today?
In the past week, on how many days did you do physical activity for 20-30 minutes? Reply with a number from 0 to 7.
Have you quit smoking or using tobacco?
Have you been smoke or tobacco free for the past 7 days?
Have you been smoke or tobacco free for the past 30 days?
Have you had at least 2 alcohol-free days in the last week?
Have you had 2 or fewer drinks per day in the last week?
